Use Strong Passwords
Create long, random, unique passwords with a password manager for safer accounts.

An Easy Way to Protect Your Accounts
Simple passwords, such as 12345, or common identifying information, like birthdays and pet names, are not safe for protecting important accounts holding critical information. Using an easy-to-guess password is like locking the door but leaving the key in the lock. Weak passwords can quickly be broken by computer hackers. But it’s impossible to remember a unique strong password for every account!

The good news is that creating and storing strong passwords with the help of a password manager is one of the easiest ways to protect ourselves from someone logging into our accounts and stealing sensitive information, data, money or even our identities.


Stop Online Crime with Strong Passwords (Audio Description)

Strengthen Your Passwords with Three Simple Tips
A strong password follows ALL THREE of these tips.

1. Make them long
At least 16 characters—longer is stronger! 

2. Make them random
Two ways to do this are:

Use a random string of mixed-case letters, numbers and symbols. For example:

cXmnZK65rf*&DaaD
Yuc8$RikA34%ZoPPao98t
Create a memorable phrase of 5 – 7 unrelated words. This is called a “passphrase.” To make it even better, get creative with spelling and/or add a number or symbol. For example:

Strong: HorsePurpleHatRunBaconShoes
Stronger: HorsPerpleHatRunBayconShoos
Strongest: HorsPerpleHat#1RunBayconShoos
3. Make them unique 
Use a different strong password for each account.

For example:

Bank: k8dfh8c@Pfv0gB2
Email account: LmvF%swVR56s2mW
Social media account: e246gs%mFs#3tv6
It’s hard to remember all these long passwords and we don’t want to save them in a file on a computer. Instead, use a password manager. See below!

decorative tipsheet icon
Passwords Tip Sheet
Download the Secure Our World Passwords Tip Sheet to share with friends and family.

DOWNLOAD TIP SHEET

Use a Password Manager
Remembering long, random and unique passwords for every account is not possible. Rather than write them down, use a password manager, an easy-to-use program that stores all your passwords. Password managers tell us when we have weak or re-used passwords and many of them can offer to generate strong passwords for us. They can also automatically fill logins into sites and apps as we move from one to another.

We only need to remember one strong password—the one for the password manager itself. (Tip: Create a memorable long “passphrase” as described above.)

There are many password managers to choose from. Some are free, like the built-in password managers in your web browser, and some cost money. Search a trusted source for “password managers” like the Consumer Reports, which offers a selection of highly rated password managers. Read reviews to compare options and find a reputable program for you.

When we use a password manager, we are much more likely to use a unique, strong password on every site. And that makes it much harder for someone to steal our valuable information!

PRO TIP Check to see whether your email accounts, banks, healthcare providers and other important accounts enforce strong password requirements. If they let you use a short password or a dictionary word, ask them why. It’s your information they’re putting at risk!

Emma Used Weak Passwords and Got Hacked
Decorative Photo of Emma
Emma was alarmed when she received a text alert from her bank confirming a $700 transfer request she hadn’t made. When she tried to log into her bank account to cancel the transfer, her password was rejected. She tried to reset her bank password but then found that she couldn’t log into her email to get the reset link.

That’s when Emma knew she’d been hacked—and it was because she’d used the same password on both accounts. Later Emma would discover her password was a part of a company breach that was posted online.

Emma spent many hours on the phone sorting through this mess and trying to reclaim her accounts. After many conversations, she finally got back into her email and bank.

Afterward, Emma knew she had to get serious about passwords. Her friend helped her set up a password manager, which was easier than she thought it would be. It suggests hard passwords when she makes new accounts. It also tells her which passwords are weak and helps make them stronger. She finally feels in control of her online safety.

Other Ways We Can Protect Ourselves Online
Online criminals look for easy targets, like people who don’t take basic precautions. If we take the following steps, we won’t be as vulnerable to their deceptive tactics. It will be much harder to scam us or steal our information. Let’s start now.

decorative photo: family looking at a tablet
Secure Yourself & Your Family
We can all protect ourselves, our friends and our families from online threats. It’s fast. It’s easy.

decorative photo of two people on a computer
Recognize & Report Phishing
Phishing often tries to get us to open a harmful attachment or share personal information. Learn what to look for to avoid the "phish hook."

decorative photo of a person using the phone
Turn on MFA
Multifactor authentication means using more than a password to access an app or account. With MFA, we might be asked to enter a text code or use a fingerprint. It makes us much safer from someone accessing our accounts.

decorative photo of a father and daughter looking at a tablet
Update Software
Don't delay software updates. Flaws in software can give criminals access to files or accounts. Programmers fix these flaws as soon as they can, but we must install updates for the latest protection!

What Are Password Security and Protection?
What are password security and protection?
Password security and password protection are practices for establishing and verifying identity and restricting access to devices, files, and accounts. They help ensure that only those who can provide a correct password in response to a prompt are given access.

See two-factor authentication (1:59)Learn about multi-factor authentication
Q&APassword VulnerabilitiesBest PracticesImproving Password SecurityRelated Topics
Contact Cisco
Why is password security needed?
Passwords remain an effective solution for identity-based access control of digital assets when considering cost, security benefits, and ease of use and management.

The average user manages more passwords than ever. Password security systems are used not just to protect data but also to verify and establish identity for personalized features and account access. Stolen credentials are commonly used by cyberattackers to deliver malware. For this reason, it's important to adopt password security best practices, such as multi-factor authentication (MFA).

How does password security work?
The application, website, or account (called the "verifier") asks the user (known as the "claimant") to type a string of characters that matches the characters stored with the verifier. Before permitting access, the verifier checks the entered phrase against its list of approved credentials to ensure the phrase and user ID match.

How secure is password security?
When used properly, password security can be very effective and plays a key role in multi-factor authentication (MFA). However, inattentive user behavior and insufficient protection of credentials by enterprises can be a cause of damaging security breaches.

The first password systems assumed that users would memorize their passwords, which would create a secure form of password management. However, passwords have proliferated in home and work life and have also become more complex. Users have too many passwords to remember and often reuse passwords. 

Hackers recognize these weaknesses and use a variety of methods to steal and guess passwords, such as sending spoofing and phishing emails. They can also purchase stolen credentials online.

What is a password manager?
A password manager is an app that generates complex passwords and stores them in an encrypted format.  The advantage of a password manager is that it remembers and autofills passwords and can suggest long, difficult-to-crack random passwords.  With a password manager, users don't need to memorize passwords or record them elsewhere, they just need to maintain access to one password account.

The downside of password managers is that all passwords are stored in one place, which could be attractive to cyberattackers. By successfully attacking a password manager, cybercriminals could obtain many passwords during a single breach. In addition, if email passwords are obtained, users can lose access to those accounts.

Practices that can make passwords vulnerable
Having nonunique passwords
Nonunique passwords may pose the biggest threat to security. When a password is reused across multiple logins, the hacker who gains access to a single user account will have access to all of that user's accounts.

Creating obvious passwords
Passwords that consist of characters such as "1234" or "password" are surprisingly common. Cyberattackers know that users may choose these easy-to-guess passwords and can use this knowledge to easily breach networks and applications.

Using personal information in passwords
Users may believe that using information such as names, birth dates, and birthplaces will help them remember passwords. But cybercriminals view this practice as a valuable tool for their exploits. Attackers can often find this personal information on social media or in public records.

Replacing letters with numbers
The practice of replacing letters with numbers in passwords—such as replacing "E" with "3," for example—is well known. Hackers can use this knowledge to guess passwords.

Best practices for password security
Embed security in training and culture
Using and managing passwords has become a challenge for users as well as IT and security teams. Protection from cyberattacks is only as strong as the weakest link. It's important that users understand the impact of their password security practices.

Change passwords frequently
Requiring users to change passwords on a regular basis is one of the easiest and most effective ways to increase the security of passwords. Enterprise management systems can require users to change passwords on a set schedule. They can also prevent them from reusing passwords or adjusting a few characters to create a new one.

Safely store passwords
As stewards of credentials for users, verifiers must store passwords in the most secure way possible. One strategy is to avoid storing passwords in plaintext format, which attackers can easily read. Furthermore, never store your credentials in a browser.

Hashing and salting are methods of encoding passwords within larger strings generated by a password management solution, which translates them back to usable passwords when needed.

Stored passwords should always be hashed with a robust formula and encrypted. In some industries, such as financial services, password hashing and encryption are required by law. To increase security further, some verifiers may impose other measures, such as a maximum number of password attempts before lockout, timed sessions requiring re-entry of credentials, or multi-factor authentication.

Best practices for improving password security
Create long, complex passwords
Passwords should be at least 10 characters in length. They should also contain a combination of upper and lowercase letters, numbers, and special characters.

Deploy multi-factor authentication
Multi-factor authentication (MFA) is a security process that requires users to respond to requests to verify their identities before they can access networks or other online applications. MFA may use knowledge, possession of physical objects, or geographic or network locations to confirm identity. When MFA is enabled, never give your password or MFA passcode to anyone over the phone or accept an MFA push notification that you did not request.

Learn about Cisco MFA 
Require challenge questions
When users want to change passwords or recover forgotten passwords, challenge questions (which ask for correct responses to questions known to the user) can provide further confirmation of a user's identity. For example, a challenge question might ask for a mother's maiden name or the name of a user's first car.

Use biometric passwords
Instead of having users store or remember complex passwords, biometric passwords provide physical proof of identities using devices that scan attributes such as fingerprints, faces, and voices. Requiring fingerprint or face scans has become a common security practice on smartphones.

Password Manager Industry Report and Market Outlook (2023-2024)
Though password manager adoption soared in the past year, next-generation security keys are gaining ground in the market.

Written By: Security.org Team | Published: September 13, 2023

Expanding social media and shuffled streaming services continually compel the creation of fresh online accounts – and an ever-growing list of complicated passwords for users. Properly managing all these credentials is challenging – but essential – as the FBI reported a record $10.2B in cybercrime last year.

Password managers (or vaults) offer a simple solution for protecting and accessing logins across the web on multiple devices. Though these services are often free and integrated with existing devices, many Americans opt instead for old-fashioned techniques: memorization, saved files, and even hand-written lists.

Our third annual report (jump to our 2022 and 2021 reports) shows that password manager use rose considerably over the last year, yet two-thirds of the public still relies on alternate methods for tracking their online logins. We recently studied the password habits of over 1,000 Americans to learn how they store credentials, why they’ve chosen certain password managers, and how likely they are to improve their digital security methods.

Key Findings
Due to increasing cyber security risks and the proliferation of digital technologies, the need for password managers in both personal and business settings continues to grow. Today, one in three Americans use password managers (up from one in five in 2022). This is an estimated 79 million people.
Google and Apple password managers, built into their devices and browsers, now account for one-half of the American market and are more popular than any other password management tools.
Ten percent of adults have already adopted emerging security key technology to handle their digital credentials, and the technology will only grow as multi-factor authentication becomes more widespread.
Despite the rise in secure password management strategies, 41 percent of online account holders still rely on memorization to track their internet passwords, and 25 percent save passwords on their devices in unencrypted files or notes.
More than one in four password manager users jeopardize their personal data by reusing master passwords elsewhere. People who engage in this unsafe practice are more likely to have experienced recent identity theft.
Seventy-one percent of those without password managers are open to signing up for services in the future, signifying the market is far from saturated.
Password Manager Use Soars Year-Over-Year
Unsecured logins and recycled passwords make digital accounts vulnerable to hackers. In 2022, more than one million Americans filed identity theft cases, with many more crimes unreported.

In a sign that web surfers are increasingly aware of such danger, the number of people using  password managers jumped approximately 60 percent in the last year. Additionally, more parts of Americans’ lives are conducted online today, from remote work and school to streaming entertainment and digital banking. The meteoric rise of digital platforms has led to a growing need to manage account credentials. In 2022, only one in five Americans used password managers, compared to one in three in our latest study.

Percentage of Americans using password managers
Despite the massive growth of password management tools, memorization remains the most common password tracking technique, with password managers now the second most popular method. Surprisingly, the introduction of physical security keys and next-generation passkeys has already garnered attention and 10 percent usage among adults.

How do you manage your online account passwords?	2022	2023
I have my passwords memorized	41%	41%
I use a password manager	21%	34%
I write them down on paper	32%	30%
I save my passwords in my browser	25%	27%
I save them in a note on my computer or mobile device	25%	25%
I use the same few passwords on all my accounts	22%	21%
I use a security passkey or other physical password device	–	10%
Note: Multiple selections allowed


What is a security key? Security keys are small, physical devices that provide an additional layer of security for various online accounts and systems. Primarily, they provide multi-factor authentication (MFA), helping users prevent unauthorized access to their online accounts and personal data. They look like tiny USB drives and can be used with computers and mobile phones.

Passkeys similarly act as personalized two-factor authenticators but can be installed on a user’s phone without needing a separate gadget. Employing public key cryptography to embed digital credentials on a client’s physical device eliminates the need for hackable or stealable passwords. Online accounts that accept passkeys can be accessed the same way one opens a phone: biometrics, PINs, or swipe patterns when the user has physical possession of the designated device.

Though Apple, Google, and Microsoft are all working to roll out this new protocol, it will be some time before universal adoption. In the meantime, users should still enlist password managers to handle their complex logins. Many password managers are also incorporating passkey support to help with the transition.

Despite these gains in password manager and passkey use, six in ten Americans still rely on insecure methods (such as memorization, repetition, notes, browsers, or unencrypted files) to keep track of their credentials.

Unfortunately, more vault subscribers are also recycling their master password for use with other logins. More than one-quarter of those with password managers reused their master password, up significantly from two years ago.

Do you use your password manager’s master password as a password on other accounts?	2021	2022	2023
Yes	19%	25%	28%
No	81%	75%	72%
This practice is particularly hazardous. Hackers who obtain one reused password in a third-party leak can then breach password manager accounts to steal all of a subscriber’s logins.

We strongly advise choosing different complex passwords for every individual account and a unique login to unlock the password manager instead of cycling through pet names or sibling birthdays that can be deciphered with public information.

Why Users Turn to Password Managers
Password managers can be indispensable when juggling numerous account credentials across multiple devices. Beyond providing additional security, they supply superior convenience. With vault functionality, there’s no need to rack one’s brain to create complex codes or to memorize them all. It is essential to have strong passwords today to protect personal data online.

According to the National Institute of Standards and Technology’s guidelines, all online passwords should have four essential qualities:

lengthy (preferably 12 or more characters)
unique (so that breaking one doesn’t compromise multiple accounts)
divorced from personal meaning (so that social networks provide no clues)
updated whenever a breach is suspected.
These sensible suggestions are difficult to follow if passwords are stored in one’s memory or scribbled in notebooks. This is why most users decide to employ password vaults.

Why do you use a password manager?	Percentage of users
I have more passwords than I can remember easily	68%
I use my logins across devices (laptop, mobile, etc)	53%
I wanted to generate complex passwords	45%
I needed to manage multiple logins for some applications	40%
I wanted my passwords encrypted	22%
I only wanted to remember one password	18%
Note: Multiple selections allowed


FYI: We’ve created a random password generator tool to help you create strong passwords in a flash.

Today, password managers are most often installed on phones, permitting mobile accessibility where users lack access to notebooks or saved desktop files. The share of people using mobile password managers has dramatically increased since our initial study in 2023. This year, three-quarters of subscribers use vaults on personal computers, and 71 percent deploy them across multiple devices.

On which devices do you use a password manager?	2021	2022	2023
Mobile phone	77%	84%	84%
Laptop or desktop computer	75%	75%	77%
Tablet	46%	44%	44%
Other	2%	1%	1%
Note: Multiple selections allowed

With remote working and cloud databases now firmly established corporate practices, professional use of password managers also continues to rise. This year, we found that 58 percent of adults use the services for employment credentials, up from 50 percent last year.

Password Manager Applications
With more Americans turning to password managers across several devices and use cases, which brands benefit most from these added customers?

Most Popular Password Managers of 2023
Our first password manager report found a fractured field of services led by pioneers like LastPass. Since then, tech giants have entered the fray and capitalized upon brand recognition, hardware integration, and competitor missteps to establish dominant market shares.

What password manager do you primarily use?	2021	2022	2023
Google Password Manager	8%	23%	30%
iCloud Keychain (Apple)	7%	17%	19%
LastPass	21%	9%	10%
1Password	7%	7%	8%
Bitwarden	8%	10%	7%
Dashlane	7%	4%	4%
NordPass	3%	3%	4%
Norton	3%	5%	3%
Keeper	10%	3%	3%
McAfee True Key	8%	2%	2%
Password Boss	2%	2%	1%
Other	15%	16%	5%
Google and Apple now dominate the market, accounting for nearly one-half of all password manager users. Two widely publicized security breaches specifically contributed to LastPass’ downfall. However, all competitors have struggled to compete with the free, convenient, seamless services now offered by Google and Apple.

Those features were prominently cited by password manager users when asked why they had chosen their current provider. The most commonly mentioned factors included:

Convenience/ease of use: Customers particularly appreciated when password managers were built-in to their devices, simple to use, and automatically generated, saved, and filled their login information. These consumer preferences supply a notable advantage to Google and Apple, automatically incorporating managers with Chrome browsers and iPhone operating systems.

Trust and familiarity: Respondents preferred brands they knew and respected — companies with a track record of positive performance. This aspect again aided prominent names like Apple and Google, but also smaller firms with a solid reputation for security, like Norton and McAfee.

Security and safety: Many users favored password managers that offered added security features that went beyond essential functions, like advanced encryption, biometric safeguards, and offline backup storage. Previous password breaches also strongly influenced selections, a criterion that hampered diminished brands like LastPass.

Recommendations and reviews: Personal recommendations from friends, families, or knowledgeable associates factored significantly in the choice of vault clients. Additionally, many users cited password manager reviews and positive online ratings as instrumental in their search.

Cost and value: Americans love a bargain – especially after several years of inflation and waning consumer confidence in the economy. Accordingly, many password manager clients mentioned free (or low-cost) options as pivotal considerations. This factor favors Apple’s and Google’s free offerings. Nearly two-thirds of password vault subscribers use free products, though slightly more Americans chose to pay for services this year compared to 2022.

How much do you pay each year for your password manager? (among users)	2022	2023
$0 (or free)	67%	63%
$1 – $20	10%	11%
$21 – $40	7%	12%
$41 – $60	6%	5%
More than $60	3%	3%
Unsure	7%	6%
However consumers select their password manager service, most are satisfied with their choice. Only one-quarter of customers changed their provider in the last year (with many of those defectors justifiably ditching LastPass after its most recent security lapse).

Additionally, those who have come to rely on password vaults show high confidence in the technology. Three out of four password manager users believe in the product’s safety. That rate is almost double the confidence shown by those without accounts.

Saftey and Security of Password Managers
How might holdouts be convinced to use password managers?

Market Outlook: Potential for Further Password Manager Expansion
Our 2022 research revealed that nearly seventy percent of those without password managers were open-minded about signing up for a service. That fertile finding proved a harbinger of significant growth in year-over-year vault usage. This year’s results are similar.

Nearly three-quarters of those who currently lack password managers would consider adopting one in the future.

Password Manager Consideration
Primary reasons for not using password managers also echoed previous findings. Many don’t believe vaults are necessary, think they are potentially unsafe, or presume they’re overly complex or expensive.

What is your main reason for not using a password manager?	2022	2023
Not sure I need one	28%	27%
They’re not secure	28%	28%
They cost too much	16%	16%
I don’t know how they work	15%	15%
They’re too hard to set up	12%	9%
Other reasons	1%	4%
Greater public awareness, education, and first-hand experience might convince more Americans to abandon memorization and notebooks to join the growing number of satisfied users better guarding and organizing online credentials.

Conclusion
The internet often acts as a modern-day melting pot, serving surfers of all ages and levels of technical savvy. This odd mix can produce both innovation and contradiction. The perseverance of password credentials may be the ultimate example of such disparities. For instance, online accounts accessing cutting-edge tech are still guarded by archaic “secret word” security concepts.

Advances like biometric passkeys are already arriving, with promises of quantum encryption further ahead, but until these methods become standard, we’re stuck using complex strings of characters. Password managers make that process easier and safer.

With the ability to generate, store, and transmit endless unique logins via one master account, properly-used password managers simplify and secure online life. Several of the most popular services come with no cost, yet only one in three Americans use them even as identity theft rises.

Fortunately, vault subscriptions jumped by one-half last year, and most non-users remain open to adoption. As more adults realize password managers’ utility, ease, integration, affordability, and trustworthiness, we can expect additional market penetration and a safer internet environment.

Creating Strong Passwords and Other Ways To Protect Your Accounts
FacebookTwitterLinkedIn
You create and keep lots of personal information in your online accounts, so you want good protections in place. Here’s how to protect your accounts with strong passwords and other security methods.
Create a Strong Password
 
Use Multi-factor Authentication
 
Pick Security Questions Only You Can Answer
 
Change Your Password If Someone Steals It
Create a Strong Password
When you set up an online account, you’re usually asked to create a password. To protect your account from cyberattacks, create a strong password that’s hard to guess. How? Start by making your password long — aim for at least 12 characters.

Of course, a long password can be hard to remember. You may find it easier to use a passphrase — a series of words separated by spaces. But make sure that your passphrase consists of random words. Avoid using common phrases, song lyrics, or movie quotes that are easy for a hacking program to guess.

If the account doesn’t allow long passwords, mix uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and symbols to make your password strong.

Studies show that people aren’t very good at creating random, strong passwords, or remembering them. So, what to do? One option is to have your web or mobile browser create a password for you. Each browser has its own process. Here’s more info on how that works:

Google Chrome
Mac
Microsoft Edge
Firefox
iPhone iOS
Android
Another option is to use a third-party password manager to create a strong password — and remember it. To find a reputable password manager, read expert reviews. Make sure the password you’re using with the password manager is strong and secure.

A web browser, mobile browser, and password manager all can save your passwords for you.

Lock Down Your Email

It's critical to protect your email account with a strong password. That’s because password reset links often go to your email inbox. If a hacker takes over your email account, they can get password reset links for your other accounts. Then they can change the passwords and take over those accounts, too. If that happens, here’s how to recover a hacked account.

Use Multi-factor Authentication
A strong password is an important first step in protecting your account from hackers. But even strong passwords are vulnerable to cyberattacks. Using multi-factor authentication means a hacker who steals your password can’t log in to your account without another authentication factor.

The most common type of multi-factor authentication is a verification passcode you get by text message or email. This one-time passcode is typically six digits or longer and it expires automatically. But this is the least secure type of two-factor authentication, so choose a more secure method like an authenticator app or a security key for more protection, if you have the option.

Pick Security Questions Only You Can Answer
When you create an account, you may have to give answers to a few security questions. Some sites may periodically ask you to answer these questions as a security measure to confirm your identity. You also may have to answer them if you need to reset your password.

Hackers could try to guess your answers to get into your account, so pick security questions only you can answer. Avoid questions with a limited number of responses that hackers can guess — like the color of your first car. And skip questions with answers that someone could find online or in public records — like your zip code, birthplace, or mother’s maiden name. If you can’t avoid those questions, treat them like a password and use random and long answers. Just be sure you can remember your answers. As with a password, make sure the question and answer are unique, not one that you use on other sites.

Image
3 Ways To Protect Your Accounts
Change Your Password If Someone Steals It
If a company or website tells you it lost your password in a data breach, change your password right away. Follow the advice above and create a new strong password. If you reused the same password, or a similar one, on other services, change it there, too.

Getting cyber smart starts with cyber hygiene. Here are tips and strategies to help keep you and your family Cyber Safe.

If you look back on the first time you created a password — be it for an email account or social media platform — you were probably told to think of a unique and complex password to help protect your information. Password security has always been relevant, but it has become even more so today as cybercriminals continue to think of new and innovative ways to hack accounts and get ahold of your personal data.

To this end, online users also need to follow new and innovative ways to create strong passwords that will keep their personal information protected. That’s where this complete guide to password security comes in. We’ll cover frequently asked questions, such as “How do I create a strong password?,” “Why is password security important?,” and “How does a password get hacked?” In addition, you’ll find how stolen passwords have recently affected businesses and individuals, along with password security tips that will help you live a more Cyber Safe lifestyle.

How to create a strong password 
An example of a strong password is accompanied by password security best practices that can help protect online accounts from hackers.
Living in the 21st century means knowing that the words “password” and “security” go hand in hand. In order to keep your accounts, information, and devices Cyber Safe, you'll need to know how to create a strong password. But you may be asking yourself, “What is a good password?” 

Here are instructions on how to create a strong password that you can rely on:

Never use personal information: Strong passwords shouldn’t include references to personal information such as  names, birthdays, addresses, or phone numbers.
Include a combination of letters, numbers, and symbols: Secure  passwords include a variety of random characters, numbers, and letters to make the password more complex.
Prioritize password length: Safe passwords should be at least 16 characters long to lessen the chances of falling victim to a data breach or cyberattack. 
Never repeat passwords: Reusing the same password for different accounts puts you at risk of credential stuffing attacks frequently used by cybercriminals.
Avoid using real words: Hackers use malicious programs that can process every word found in a dictionary to crack passwords. Stay away from using proper nouns and other standalone dictionary words that could lead to an unsecure password.
Why is password security important? 
On average, people reuse the same password for 10 different accounts. Because of this, it's needless to note that the majority of people need to rethink their password security.

Without having password security best practices top of mind, individuals and businesses alike could be leaving themselves open to cybersecurity threats. Some potential consequences of weak password security include:

Data breaches
Identity theft
Computer hijacking
Blackmail
Loss of privacy 
Inadequate password security could not only endanger the Cyber Safety of individuals and customers, but also could lead to financial troubles. Cybercriminals are often looking for ways to access personal banking information or use ransomware to make themselves a profit. Businesses and individuals within the U.S. lost nearly $4.2 billion to cybercrimes within the last year alone.  

How does a password get hacked?
Five illustrations accompany the most common password security threats, including dictionary attacks, credential stuffing attacks, password spraying, keylogging, and phishing scams.  
There are many ways for cybercriminals to hack the security passwords you took the time to dream up. Here’s a list of a few commonly used techniques to look out for. 

Dictionary attacks  
Dictionary attacks are a type of brute force cyberattack. Hackers use malicious programs to scan and test every word within a dictionary as a person’s password. These types of cyberattacks are why we emphasize the use of different letters, numbers, and symbols when creating secure passwords. 

PASSWORD SECURITY TIP: Avoid real words and incorporate a variety of letters, numbers, and characters.
Phishing scams 
Phishing is a type of social engineering scam that tries to trick users into supplying their login credentials online. Hackers use malicious links and cloned websites to imitate legitimate businesses, presenting a fake form to input your login information. 

PASSWORD SECURITY TIP: Always check the links you’re clicking on and take advantage of antivirus software.
Password spraying
Password spraying is a hacking technique that cybercriminals use to guess the passwords of their potential victims. The method uses an extensive list of frequently chosen passwords to test against an individual’s username. If there is a match, the hacker will get access to the account information. 

The remedy for this type of cyberattack falls back on creating strong, unique passwords and avoiding easy-to-remember phrases, which makes password spraying incredibly difficult for the cybercriminals at large. 

PASSWORD SECURITY TIP:  Don’t fall back on commonly used passwords, such as “12345” or “qwerty.”
Keylogging 
Keylogging involves the installation of malware that can track a person’s keystrokes as they type on their computer. Though these attacks are more difficult to pull off compared to phishing and password spraying attacks, it could lead to a hacker figuring out usernames and passwords if they pay enough attention.

Because the attacker is able to see what you’re typing, creating a strong password really won’t do anything to protect you. In this case, it’s a good idea to have cybersecurity software installed that can alert you of a potential threat on your device. 

PASSWORD SECURITY TIP:  Explore antivirus software you can have installed onto your device.
Credential stuffing attacks 
Not to be confused with password spraying, credential stuffing uses known passwords to gain access to account information. This differs from password spraying because the passwords tested during credential stuffing attacks are stolen credentials obtained in a previous data breach.

Protecting yourself against credential stuffing mainly involves remembering to never reuse the same passwords for different accounts — no matter how unique it may seem. This endangers your most sensitive data, which could put you in an undesirable situation. 

PASSWORD SECURITY TIP:  Create unique passwords for each of your online accounts.
The effects of stolen passwords 
To help you understand the true danger of not knowing how secure your passwords are, consider these recent statistics underscoring how relevant password security really is.

Individuals and stolen password consequences:

4 out of 10 people have had their data compromised online. (Google, 2019)
There were over 240,00 phishing scam complaints reported in 2020. (FBI, 2020)
80 percent of data breaches involving hacking are connected to passwords. (Verizon, 2020)
63 percent of consumers fear their identity will be stolen. (Norton, 2021) 
 Businesses and stolen password consequences:

Across all industries, it took 280 days on average to identify and contain a data breach. (IBM, 2020)
59 percent of U.S. consumers are likely to avoid businesses that have become a victim of a cyberattack within the past year. (Arcserve, 2020)
57 percent of all companies have experienced a mobile phishing incident. (Wandera, 2020)
68 percent of business leaders feel their risk of experiencing a cyberattack is increasing. (Accenture, 2019)
10 password security tips 
Ten illustrations accompany password security tips that can help people protect themselves from cybersecurity threats.
Now that you understand the importance of password security and how to make strong passwords, pore over this full list of password security tips to improve your cyber hygiene.  

Don’t use personal information: Using names, birthdays, addresses, or phone numbers in your password could jeopardize its effectiveness against cyberattacks.
Randomize patterns and sequences: Randomizing the patterns and sequences of letters, numbers, and characters can protect you against password spraying attacks.
Never reuse passwords: Recycling old passwords leaves your accounts vulnerable to credential stuffing
efforts made by lurking cybercriminals.
Prioritize password length: The longer your password, the more difficult it will be for hackers to guess.
Never share your passwords: Sharing your passwords with friends or family compromises the Cyber Safety of your personal accounts.
Avoid public Wi-Fi: Using public Wi-Fi without a VPN allows hackers to track your online presence and potentially expose your device’s data, including saved credentials. 
Use a variety of numbers, letters, and characters: Hackers are less likely to gain access to accounts with complex passwords incorporating a variety of numbers, letters, and characters.
Download a trusted password manager: Password managers are an excellent tool for people struggling to ideate and organize their own passwords.
Check your password strength: Password strength checkers , like LastPass, allow people to validate the effectiveness of the password they created.
Change passwords periodically: Switching up the passwords you created for your different accounts can reassure you that you’re taking all the necessary steps to keep your accounts and data safe. 
Password security is important, but it’s only one part of your cybersecurity puzzle. To create a reliable cybersecure ecosystem for yourself, you’ll want to think about all the ways you can protect your devices, from using a firewall to consistently monitoring your network for suspicious activity. Adopting this kind of mindset will make you a tough match against the tricks cybercriminals have up their sleeves.

Frequently asked questions
Keep reading for answers to frequently asked questions regarding password security.

What is password security?
Password security involves using cybersecurity tools, best practices, and procedures to create passwords that can better protect personal information.  

Why is password security important? 
Creating a secure password is the first step a person can take to safeguard their personal devices and information.

What are the safest types of passwords? 
The best types of passwords include a wide variety of numbers and characters with a mix of uppercase and lowercase letters. They shouldn't reference personal information, such as names, addresses, or phone numbers.  

How do I make my password secure? 
Follow these five tips for creating a secure password:

Never use personal information.
Include a combination of letters, numbers, and characters.
Prioritize password length.
Never repeat passwords.
Avoid using real words.
What is an example of a secure password? 
A strong password includes a mix of numbers, symbols, and letters while also prioritizing length. 

An example of a secure password would be: Wb%liYrLVNip*7lv

What are the five most common passwords? 
The five most common passwords used today include:

123456
123456789
qwerty
password
12345
How do hackers get your password? 
There are a number of ways hackers can get ahold of your password. Some methods hackers commonly use include credential stuffing, password spraying, keylogging, phishing scams, and dictionary attacks.

Does changing your password stop hackers? 
Yes, changing your password can prevent hackers from getting their hands on your sensitive information.

Can a password be attacked by brute force? 
Yes, some passwords are susceptible to brute force techniques. Credential stuffing, password spraying, and dictionary attacks are common methods seen on the internet.

Can a password be dictionary attacked? 
Yes, passwords using one single word are susceptible to dictionary attacks. Using a complex password with a variety of letters, numbers, and characters is a quick solution. 

